How do you feel?
Everything's over.
Two very minor pieces.
Yeah.
It wasn't bad, particularly for the times.
I think it went fine.
Any regrets there?
No.
I mean, I know some of the people who left them, and I know that they're going to take good care.
Who was Joseph crying for, I wonder?
I don't know.
I'm wondering whether he was handling Getty.
You think so?
Since Max wasn't fitting on those, I thought baby Joseph was handling Getty, but I don't know.
But I noticed he's working with Jim Collins, who— I don't know if Dick— Who does that a lot.
Yeah, but he represents Dick Manny.
I don't know if Manny's into Bynies or not.
Could be somebody here.
That's interesting, but you don't know.
Yeah, well, since Max wasn't fitting, I wonder whether Getty was even in on those.
Are you confident they're going to good new homes?
I'll find out real soon.
You will, huh?
Sure.
You expect to talk to the people?
I'll talk to Dave Grass afterwards, sure.
Beforehand, it wouldn't be appropriate for him to tell me anything, but now he can tell me whatever the person will let him tell me.
Once I figured out who you were, I watched to look for expression.
I've never really observed an individual who owns a major collection like this.
What was my expression like?
It was stolen.
You were very good.
It was cool, right?
So what were you feeling?
Well, I was really wondering what the jewelry bindings were going to bring.
I was very interested in that.
The miniatures went extremely well, I thought.
Important miniatures.
So there were a lot of miniature collectors.
This set a new record for jewelry boxes.
This did?
Oh, yeah.
They never sold one for $150,000.
But this is the best one ever made.
Right.
You're going to miss it?
Oh, not really.
No, I told you I'm fine.
I'm really fine.
If you don't miss something, you should not do it.
That's right.
Move on to the next thing.
That's good.
Yeah.
Well, you didn't have a number, so you were tempted to get any other stuff back.
Not a lot.
Against the rules.
I didn't, yeah.
I was just teasing.
But I look at that, things I had compared to that, and I say, jeez, I think I had the nice...
Looking great.
What are we looking at?
We're looking at a Picasso.
This is for my tape.
Estimated at $2.8 million to $3.5 million.
And here it is.
There are some great Picassos.
Did you do a thumbnail?
Did you figure out what it grossed?
Less than 10%?
The over $800,000.
Is that about what you expected?
Yeah.
That's about...
It came in overall above the highest number.
Would you like to try to work too?
I think I'm the first one to ask you to do that.
Yeah.
Make sure I've got a pen.
This will work.
What do you want me to say?
Inside someplace.
Just describe it to Nick and put the date on it.
Why don't I ask you to hold on?
Sure.
Well, this is very exciting.
I'll shut this off.
Did your wife come to the sale with you?
She stayed in the hotel.
How did she feel about the collection?
Was she an active participant?
Not really.
Not too much.
I'll let you know when I'm coming out to L.A.
if that's all right.
Maybe we could get together.
Is that all right with you?
I'd love to do it.
I'm shooting back up to Boston now.
I'm a little hyped for you.
Are you?
Oh, yeah.
Really?
So you don't show your abortions.
Oh yeah, I'm, you know, the adrenaline's working.
Really?
Were you nervous at all?
Sure.
What was the nature of your anxiety?
Well, the Jew Bindings.
I mean, the Jew Bindings, whether or not they'd be recognized for what they were.
That's not the money.
You told me that earlier.
No, but I wanted them to be recognized for the importance that they had, and they were.
I mean, there was...
definitely a buyer there.
David wasn't buying for himself.
And at this point you don't know who the buyer is.
No, no.
But you have a good idea.
Might not.
You've got to find out.
Yeah, I'll find out.
I don't have a good idea.
I don't think it is Kenny.
Because he would have gone to Mags.
He always goes to Mags.
And since Mags wasn't bidding against who it was.
But Mags bought heavily early on.
Mags bought a lot of
other kinds of books, but didn't buy the jewel bindings.
The jewel bindings were other people.
But even some of the other jewel bindings came in very, very well.
I thought this was the first jewel binding ever made.
We're looking at 101.
First jewel binding ever done.
And for 14,000, it's a festival of 7,000.
So that was twice the estimate.
And that went very well.
That's the beauty of a book.
We're talking about 100.
Yeah.
That's great.
Well, I'm going to let you go in and take care of your business.
Hello, this is 3708.
When you hear the tone, please leave your name
telephone number, and any message.
Thank you.
Here is the tone.
Mrs. Omora, this is Nick Bazbaines.
I spoke to you about a month ago, and I wrote you a letter and also sent a copy of the letter that I sent to your husband several months ago.
And what I'm inquiring is to the proximity of perhaps talking to him about the formation of his library.
I'll give a call back again next week.
However, my home phone number is 508-839-9257.
Thank you very much.
The date of that call is November 23, 1990 at 2.30 p.m.
I'll have to think about it, you know, what I would not want that to do.
is to present me as an advocate for either side, you know what I'm saying?
I think that would be entirely appropriate for you not to be an advocate, however, from just what brief conversation I had with you.
It's obvious to me that you're one of the two people that I've talked to who has a thorough understanding of this disease in the fabric of society.
Well, and I could give you, if anything, a historical...
Because that's what I'm writing.
I have a historical background on it.
And that's what you were looking for.
That's what we're looking for.
We're looking for things... You've talked to Nicholson and I both, so I guess I'm comfortable talking about him.
You're dealing with two chronic overachievers here, Don Nicholson and myself, that we do not, when we work a case together, do not leave anything...
a chance that we can possibly address.
And just the very fact that there is a history of this particular mental illness is something we fully expect the prosecution to dispute.
Let me also say that I am not suggesting that it's mental illness, by the way.
You're not?
No, I'm not.
I'm going to be honest with you on that.
The people I am writing about
I will happily send you a letter and give you an outline of what I'm doing, but I consider what the people I'm learning about have done very productive things.
I mean, Isaiah Thomas was a bibliomaniac.
It is from him that I get the title of my book.
When he died, his grandson said my grandfather was afflicted with the gentlest of infirmities.
He was a bibliomaniac.
The gentle madness.
Right, exactly.
So from that I derived my title.
But what did he do?
I mean, he went all over.
We're talking about a guy who died in the early 1800s at his time.
He was the most important colonial, federal printer in the United States.
And he happened to be based here in Worcester, but he founded the American Aquarian Society to house his collection.
You know, you have the McCartonian collection.
In England, when they had the dissolution of the monasteries, and they were destroying the Woodastic libraries, and you had a few collectors who definitely were good many maniacs, but you would not have Beowulf, you would not have the Lindisfire and Gospels of the Mespasi and Psalters if it weren't for these people, Sir Thomas Phillips.
Surely you've heard of Sir Thomas Phillips.
That's a book titled, My Mundy Portrait of an Obsession.
Phillips is a guy, he wasn't.
know about, because he was really... Well, I think we're going to probably try to talk you into educating us a little bit.
Phillips was absolutely... I mean, he was a little disturbed, but then again, they were selling his stuff 100 years after he died, and they were making discoveries up until the late 60s.
The guy died in 1872.
Major, major things that exist nowhere else except in his collection, you know?
So, I...
As I said to Don Schoonover when I first talked to him right after this case broke, I thought that when people were saying this guy was a bibliomaniac, I said, I don't think they're really using the right word, because bibliomaniacs, in my mind, can be a very productive thing if it's channeled with restraint.
Not particularly the guy that you're dealing with.
Our guy kind of falls in the middle here.
Well, you know, but there are some things that strengthen, though, what you're saying here in a couple of ways.
Number one, the nature of what he collected was fairly specific.
Number two, he never sold anything for a profit.
There was no intent of furthering his own ends beyond the accumulation of the books.
Number three, one of the things that you said to me the other day has been,
sort of bouncing around my memory ever since, that having to do with the fact that these folks don't make very good preparations for what they're going to do with these books after they're there and they're not around anymore.
That's right.
That's a whole consideration of my book.
And I can give you cases of, I hate to give cases of living people, because one of the things my book has done is
Half of my book is going to be about living book collectors.
You see, that has not been done.
Most people who write about book collectors write about people who've been dead.
Living collectors don't, as a rule, like to talk about their collections for many reasons.
You can appreciate some of them.
Not the least of which is it attracts bandits.
Exactly.
But nevertheless, I have persuaded 25 of the most important collectors of the United States to talk to me.
And in some cases, you've got people who have made very definite provisions
for the disposition of their collection.
You have another guy like Walter Forzheimer, who was a charter member of the CIA.
Well, he's made plans for the stuff to go to Yale.
He's got the finest intelligence collection in the world.
He has a marvelous collection of Bourdieu stuff that he inherited from his father.
But when I visited him at his home and library at the Watergate in Washington, I said, well, now he's in his 70s.
I said, are you going to see this stuff go to Yale?
That's kind of a gentle way of saying, you know,
He said, no, he says, he'll carry me out first, and then he'll carry the books out, you know, and so he's going to keep them.
Stephen visited Yale, too.
Let me just give you a couple of things to pique your interest here.
You don't have to pique my interest.
The Federal Bureau has dramatically underestimated the number of libraries that Stephen visited.
Really?
They say he visited 147.
They say.
I know that Stephen has, in fact, visited about 281.
They also maintain, of course, that all these books are stolen, which we know is not, in fact, the case.
Many of them were obtained by trade and by incessant haunting of every bookstore within a 2,000-mile radius.
They've also accused him of being out of the country on a number of occasions.
There are some books from Scotland that showed up, but, in fact, Stephen has never left the United States.
This case is just bizarre beyond belief.
And frankly, Nick, today is not my best day to talk about it because I had the entire Bloomberg clan in my house for Thanksgiving yesterday, which is sort of like spending eight hours in the Twilight Zone.
There's such a history of mental illness in this family, it's unbelievable.
History?
Oh, you bet.
We've got four generations of pathological collectors here.
God.
What a hell of a story this is, right here.
I know.
Believe me.
How do I ask this question?
I mean, this is quite a defense that they're putting up for what amount to two interstate transportation charges.
Especially when you're being forced to take a defense of insanity, so obviously you're stipulating to the fact that he took these things.
You bet.
Do I gather this is the family kind of circling the wagons around in one of their homes?
Now, what you do in terms of writing this book after the trial is over is what you do then.
What I tell you now, you must give me your word that you will...
handle this in an appropriate manner.
No, I don't do business that way.
If I can't say it, I don't say it.
But you hit on something here, Nick, that is... What you got here, believe it or not, is in fact four generations of various types of mental illness, some of which were far less benign.
And Stephen, for...
A number of reasons became what in the psychiatric trade is called the symptom bearer.
I mean, he's got it all.
We're talking poly madness here.
There's a little bit of everything with this guy.
How do I spell that poly?
P-O-L-Y.
You've got a situation here where you've got a guy who has some of the most bizarre social theories you've ever heard who thinks, for example, that the entire United States economy is going to collapse
and that the only thing that will be worth anything is gold, and therefore accumulates 90 pounds of gold.
The doorknob thing is a whole other thing that's just so far out there it's unreal.
This is public information.
50,000 doorknobs.
900 stained glass windows.
120,078 RPM records.
Can you hang on while I get my other lines?
Absolutely.
I've been haunted by this case literally seven days a week.
Among other things, Nick, I have Steven living with me.
No, no, no.
He's been out on bond since June.
He's living with you?
Well, yeah.
And that's been quite an exciting thing.
However, he has nothing but contempt for my books.
Because I read fiction, and I have a large library, obviously, because of my profession having to do with crime, most of which he finds tedious.
The only thing I own that he respects at all is a first edition Hound of the Baskervilles.
The rest of it, that's junk to him.
Well, that's a pretty, so you collect in some way.
No, just the professional stuff.
Hound of the Baskervilles is a pretty good first edition.
That was a Christmas gift from my wife some years ago.
It really is not, Steve likes it because it's got a fairly decent binding on it, but he can also tell me all these things that I don't have that I should have.
Yeah.
But where were we?
Well, we were talking about the family.
He was talking about four generations.
You got compulsive collector after compulsive collector.
You had one?
Before you, let me interrupt.
Let me say, okay, I'm writing a book.
I work here in a newspaper.
I'm the book editor at the newspaper.
I write periodically on book collecting matters, but that's really to help me organize stuff.
Anything I write about Bloomberg will not appear until after the trial.
And in all likelihood, it will not appear until it appears in my book, unless my agent is able to sell some serials from the book prior to publication.
But in any case, that would be long after that matter is resolved.
In return to that, I will tell you this.
What I feel I can legitimately discuss with you at this point, I will.
with the understanding that I also have an expectation that I may pick your brain in return.
My pleasure.
And I sent you that piece on the, from the, I haven't been home, I was down, Mark was waiting for Thanksgiving, but I have to go find that article that, I mean, took me weeks to find.
It's in the Journal of Criminal Law, and it's titled Bibliomania, and it's an article by Max Sander.
And he does give a number, and it's of criminal law,
cases of bibliomania.
Yeah, the only one of any size in the States in recent years was a fellow by the name of James Richard Shinn.
Shinn was popped in St.
Louis about seven or eight years ago, but he was a straight for-profit steal-on-contract sort of a... How do you spell Shinn?
S-H-I-N-N.
Okay.
You know, Hartman had a couple of cases of bibliomania.
Yeah, I've heard that there have been a number of cases that folks just sort of bite their lower lip and don't talk about it.
Well, they have had a couple, like, and they were members of the faculty and stuff.
The most amazing thing about this one is just the sheer bulk of what he had.
It's more than that.
Well, to me it was, because frankly, he dedicated his whole life to this.
Well, Buck, you see, there's a guy on one island that had over a million books.
Oh, well, he wasn't.
But he didn't send these when I'll start one.
But there was no focus to this guy.
I mean, I'm not interested in a million books, but I just picked up haphazardly at every stop along the way.
What really, I have asked three people who have been in to see the Bloomberg collection, if we can call it that.
I like that.
Yeah.
I'm going to use it, too.
Okay.
And I have asked each one of these people, and you would know the name of every one of these people, well, not taking into account the circumstances of how we acquired it, how do you judge its taste in books?
One exception.
They said the man has excellent taste.
It's a beautiful collection.
You know what I mean?
She shows a lot of discrimination, a lot of taste.
That's what you're going to have.
By the way, if you want to talk frankly, that's maybe where you're going to have trouble on the inside of the end.
Well, we're aware of that, but you see, it's a much larger issue in the sense that there are focuses to that collection, but the focuses feed right back into 25, well, almost 35 years of mental illness.
They are
items that revolve around, uh, a wider, um, keeping in mind I'm not a psychiatrist, uh, they revolve around a wider illness than just this.
What this is with Steve in many ways is an attempt to retreat totally into the past, specifically into the late Victorian era.
Uh, his interests primarily revolved around that and religion.
Um,
there is a tremendous amount of religious material in the books.
Is there a particular religion or just a religion?
Generic, really.
The two focuses that I noticed is a lot of interest in Catholicism, especially early Catholicism, hence the Bishop's Bible, et cetera, et cetera, and also around the Mormons.
Now, some of his odd social theories, if I can call them that,
also have to do with the Mormons, and he's into conspiracies heavily.
I mean, we're talking about things like the Bavarian Illuminati, this long-running thing about the relationship between the Mormons and the Masons, and some pretty, well, you know, I don't quite have a word for it that doesn't sound derogatory.
No, I'm pretty interested in this stuff.
I mean, there are people who collected, you know, extraordinary collections on witchcraft.
And, you know, it's just one thing.
Have you even seen a bibliography or a listing of these books?
Some of them.
The thing, the listings alone run to a couple thousand pages.
I saw one that was put together on an Americana thing.
It was full out.
I didn't get it from him, so I could tell you, from Glenn Dawson out of L.A., which I got from somebody else, who's an expert on that particular end.
I was very impressed by him.
Oh, it's an impressive collection.
However, gone into, you know, first of all, this is something that you need to be aware of.
There have, in fact, been no book fests for over three years.
The book thing, I think, had finally caught up with him to the point where he simply could not control the collection, or had been trying, at least, to control the collecting.
Oh, control the collecting, control himself.
Essentially the same thing.
By the way, you've got to meet this guy at some point.
I'd be very disappointed if I went out there and it didn't happen.
He is one of the most self-effacing individuals I have ever met.
I've seen his IQ tests.
I've seen his abilities, both artistic and in other ways.
He's a fine graphic artist.
But to see him or to talk to him, you would think you were dealing with a homeless person here.
his personal hygiene borders on a tooth ball.
Believe me, I know.
How is it that people don't remember seeing him in their libraries?
He remembers somebody who didn't smell good.
Are you, by any chance, a Woody Allen fan?
Yeah.
Okay.
Did you ever see Allen's movie, Zelec?
No.
Well, this is a movie that Woody made about ten years ago.
It's about this guy who's the ultimate chameleon.
He becomes a Nazi.
And later on, he becomes a member of the Civil Rights Movement with Reverend King.
Steve can do that.
Functional invisibility.
Is he going to take the stand, by the way?
Oh, no.
Oh, no way.
Why not?
Well, because this is an insanity defense, and if we put him on the stand and the prosecution can find some area of lucidity of which there are some, they can damage our defense.
It would be unwise for either his attorney or myself to have even suggested he'd be on the stand.
You know, just let me say that I do know that people go in there testifying and tell you that you know this.
how extraordinary the collection is, how focused it is.
We're not quarreling with it.
How selective it is.
Yeah, we're not quarreling with that at all.
We're not talking about what.
We're talking about why.
Now, one of the things you always ask a collector, a genuine collector, as opposed to an accumulator, there are two kinds of people who gather books right away acquiring.
They are either accumulators or collectors.
The true collector knows his collection.
Does Stephen know his collection?
Intellectually.
intimately.
Those books that he could read, he did.
But he never acquired an item and just put it on the shelf.
Do you think he made an attempt to penetrate it, to understand it?
That he also did because of the limitations on his ability to read other languages and specifically Latin.
He would attempt to piece his way through these things.
This guy's looking for the answer.
All of this has to do with looking for the answer.
That's the capital A. All right, but what's the question?
Well, you know, I don't know.
What's the capital Q?
I could be facetious and say the question is, what is the meaning of life?
Well, no, that's what I mean.
That may in fact be what he was looking for.
Listen, you're talking to a guy who deals with book collectors, I mean, and who happens to be one himself, you know.
Well, you're talking to a guy who primarily deals with murderers, and I've been
Yes, if I did some biggies, including the Gacy case over in Chicago.
Which one?
Oh, really?
Yeah.
It was a big case.
You betcha.
Weirdest damn thing I ever saw with John Gacy.
He's nowhere near as far out as Steve Blumberg is.
Do you have an affection to this guy?
You cannot help it.
There is something about this man that does... I'm not a particularly kind-hearted person.
But I do have an affection for him because it is a gentle madness, and frankly... You like my title, huh?
Yes, very much.
I admire that greatly.
You're not going to talk it around now.
No, but I'll tell you, it's perfect for this case.
I mean, you told me the other day about someone who had killed for a book.
This is a guy, yeah.
This is a guy who might very well die for a book.
He told me, he said, you know, I knew someday I was going to be in one of these places.
go after me and I might get hurt or even killed.
But I couldn't stop.
I had to save these things.
Did he have an idea when he was going in what he was going after?
Or was it more like targets of opportunity as we used to say in the Navy?
You know, again, it's somewhere in the middle.
Sometimes I think yes and other times definitely no.
He also went into a number of libraries that I know of that he didn't take anything from.
One of the more humorous aspects of this business, of his being out on bond, is when he was moved down here to Des Moines from Minneapolis, they put a restriction on his bond that he couldn't go into libraries or museums.
And this is a man who practically lives his life in places like that.
And I had to deliver that news to him, and he got this kind of...
I'd look at his eyes, and he said, Ray, it doesn't matter.
I've been in all the libraries around here, and there's nothing that I'm worth taking.
Well, I'll give you a, I mentioned Sir Robert Cotton to you earlier, right?
Sir Robert Cotton, he's the fellow who rescued Beowulf, and a number of other wonderful, wonderful things.
Basically, the British Museum was started as a result of his collection.
But he also was a very political guy, and he got in trouble with the crown.
In fact, there was even a, well, this is all documents.
He had trouble with the crown, and he was supposed to have his head chopped off, but they let him go.
But there was one provision.
They sealed his library, and he could never visit his books for the rest of his life, and he died of a broken heart.
They did the same kind of thing that they did to your guy.
I think he's dying of a broken heart.
He is.
He loved these things, huh?
I think I told you the other day about what it was like
going over there to that warehouse in Omaha with him.
I have never in my life seen him in pain that concentrated.
Just the sheer agony came off of him way to the day.
And frankly, after that, I think Steve began to stop caring about what happened to him.
All along during this entire thing, his biggest worry was
tell that day had been whether or not the Phoebes were taking care of these books.
What are you telling them?
The Federal Bureau of Investigation.
They have a lot of names in my business.
We call them the Phoebes, and we also occasionally have been known to say that FBI stands for Fart, Belch, and Lie.
But you're on a different level than us.
You don't have to be the target of these guys,
Well, you know, they'll go after a defense investigator, too.
I've had them chase me around and flip me a bunch at that time on other cases.
Although, basically, they've been pretty, well, they've left us pretty much alone on this one.
But in any case, yeah, I can see that where someone would.
I think after Steve saw that the books were, that the collection was intact, that they were not suffering from any sort of environmental damage or anything like that,
but that he could not touch them and probably would never touch them again.
I think he's sort of given up heat, which is very sad.
Now, you asked earlier why we were fighting this thing as hard and aggressively as we are.
The answer to that is very simple.
The United States Prosecutor's Office has indicated that they want to go not only for the charges proper,
to argue under the sentencing guidelines for an upward enhancement to give this guy 10 flat calendar years in prison.
Given the nature of that sort of approach, it would be remiss for Nicholson or anyone else on the defense team to even contemplate fleeing him or anything like that because they're just simply, you know, they're proceeding from the assumption that they have some sort of master thief here.
And you have a highly intelligent thief
but he's not a master thief, and he does not necessarily even perceive himself as a thief.
He doesn't?
He doesn't believe he stole anything?
Well, you know, this is one of those odd sort of mindsets that comes when you deal with the really far-out criminal stuff.
I commend your attention to a case called United States v. Sullivan.
It was decided a couple of years ago.
That's not Sullivan v. New York Times.
Let me explain it down to U.S.
I'm going to Harvard next week.
Yeah, U.S.D.
Sullivan.
Basically what it said was this was an insanity defense case.
And basically what it said was even in a situation where someone knows that what they are doing is wrong, if they are totally convinced that they have a moral obligation to carry out that act,
Then, in fact, the insanity defense does apply.
It's also been referred to, by the way, as the Henry David Thoreau.
Beautiful.
Stephen did not steal.
He rescued.
In Stephen's mind.
Except that he had burglary tools, so.
Oh, yeah.
On the other hand, I know that he got into the library.
No, go right ahead.
Go right ahead.
On the other hand, he got into the secure section at the library at Dartmouth with a piece of dental floss.
Because that's probably all he realized that he needed.
Yeah.
All I'm saying is that, let's say I'm a juror.
I've not met any of these people, and I don't like to go any way, but I see if the guys, if the feds come in with a whole bag of burglary tools...
purposes only to break and to enter, then you have to say to yourself, he didn't know he was stealing, question mark?
Oh, no, that's not what we're saying at all.
But he's using these tools to rescue.
Again, it's not about what, it's about why.
Right.
You know, on a number of occasions also, you know, he spent money out of his own pocket having various items from his collection restored.
Are you kidding?
No.
He had entirely sealed that house in a tumbler to create an environmentally correct placement for the books so that they would not deteriorate in any way.
He protected these books aggressively.
The lengths that he went to...
protect the books, to love them, if you will, is far beyond anything that a professional criminal would do.
What you have here, sadly enough, is an individual who, because of aspects of his own life, has grown up functionally unable to love people, but who can love things and has replaced people with things.
I have one of the quotes that opens my book, the very first page, is this French guy who I've told you, Sylvester de Sassi.
And he just says, oh, my darling books, who will love you the way I have loved you when I'm gone?
Who has gathered you with the sweat of his brow?
You know, he just can't stand the thought of seeing them laid out in the ocean.
I mean, he's talking about them as a piece of tale.
Excuse me.
Exactly.
I mean, more than that, as a lifelong companion, the mother of his children, whatever, you know, they actually go from being inanimate to animate objects.
And it's a phenomenon.
It's almost impossible to put your finger on it, except that we know it, we see it, and I've traced it through the centuries.
And it is now in the DSM-3 and DSM-3R, so there's no question about it being a valid psychiatric issue.
What?
I'm sorry, what is that?
Guidebooks that are used by psychiatrists for... This is something I want to check out.
...specifically for diagnosing.
They're usually referred to, and I should know what they mean, but it's called the DSM-3 and the DSM-3R, which that's the newest version.
And these are what?
You mean Bibliomania is in there?
Yeah, this is the listing of all the various manias and, you know, diagnoses that have been... You're kidding me.
No, it's in there.
This is something I'm going to tackle Monday, I'm afraid.
I got that information from our fellow down at Manager.
We've even got to Manager Clinic in this story.
Yeah.
That's the one nice thing about this one, as opposed to most of the cases I do where I'm defending a team with...
a client who's either impoverished or close to it, is that we can fight this one, full-tilt Boogie.
Are we saying that he's almost impoverished?
No, no, he's not at all.
Quite the contrary.
Most of my clients are.
But there is support from the family.
There is.
Pregnant of support from the family.
But, you know, even that's a double-edged sword.
If he hadn't acquired any books, notice I'm using the word acquire,
as opposed to another more pejorative word.
In three years, what, did somebody drop a dime on him or something?
He was overloaded.
He didn't have any place to put him.
And I think that from what I've been able to discover, not from what he's told me, but that he had a sense that they were aware of him.
by name.
And in fact, my feeling is that they've been aware of him by name since 1985.
From what I understand, he was actually stopped once.
He was detained.
Actually twice.
Once in 1974 in Colorado with a carload of books and once in 1988 out in Riverside, California.
Where?
Riverside.
But the first instance is 16 years.
Yeah.
Well, I tell you, this is a fascinating story.
It's awesome.
All right.
But, you know, if you, I have probably right now, the investigative files and documents on this case, I would say right now probably are close to three feet thick.
Jeez.
You know, when I was hired on this thing, I was given to understand that I was not going to be able to work on anything else except this until we went to trial.
Our original trial date was in September.
And very honestly, I would have had to do it this way in any case, because the thing is, we're basically finding ourselves with a lifetime of pathology, all of which has to be dismantled and understood.
This collecting mania with him actually started back when he was 14.
It goes back that far.
This is going to come out of the trial?
Oh, yeah.
This will all come out of the trial.
Wow.
All right.
Where do we go from here?
That's my question.
Let me write you a letter.
All right.
I have to think.
I don't want to do anything that would damage myself as an impartial observer.
No, and I would appreciate that caution.
I have to be, you know, hey, I'm done.
Now, I'll tell you, I'm going to ask for your help on the trial, but there's another issue, and I want to be up front with you.
But I don't want to blow it and be identified as a partisan in any camp.
Right.
I can't do that.
The other aspect of this is that the family has approached me and asked me if I will write a book about him when this is over.
Well, now you and I have to talk.
So that's why I'm bringing this up.
Okay.
I would not be writing about bibliomania.
I would be writing about Steve Blumberg.
Let me just briefly give you my situation, okay?
Okay.
My situation is this.
I am under contract to Random House.
I will be completing this book by June of 91.
I'm on the contract to submit it in March of 91, but I get an extension through June because I've traveled close to 40,000 miles in the last year, and the...
The research has just gone beyond my wildest expectations.
Oh, yeah.
And it's going to be a really fine book.
I also have a paperback deal.
This is my first book, but I have what's known as a hard, soft deal.
I got a hardcover deal with Random House and a softcover deal with Lentridge.
And I have confidence in the book.
I'm also writing a piece from the New York Times, which will appear in February, which will not be blown in this case.
Anyway.
Good, because we'll be in trial then.
Yeah, I don't know.
This is going to be the status of book collecting right now with the economic recession, blah, blah, blah.
How does it compare with book collecting 50 years ago?
Well, it will give me a little more credibility as a writer with a national punch.
In fact, I was able to score this with the Times.
It was spectacular.
But my contract also closed.
I mean, they have an option.
You can't do better than Random House, by the way.
for our book, you know?
I'm looking for another book.
And I'll have this one done in June.
It will appear, and God willing, in March of 92.
And by that time, I really hope to be working on book number two.
I hope it would be nice if I could be working on it now.
Well, you're a published writer.
I'm not.
Let me also tell you that one of the reasons I got a delay was talking to my editor in New York
And I said, let me go in June on this book, because I do want to go up to Des Moines.
And she said, wow, you know, she liked it.
She's a senior editor at Random House.
So she thought that was wonderful.
So what I'm saying is, you should certainly sit down and have a cup of coffee or a drink or something.
I want to go up to Des Moines and just talk informally.
I think that would be a good idea.
For one thing, I can give you access to some things that will not be trial material.
I have all the appropriate releases already in place, but I can give you access.
And I must tell you, I'm not all that enthusiastic about writing a book about this, because very frankly, I run a fairly successful private investigative practice, and by the time this comes down, I'll have already spent eight months on one case.
That's how it works.
You know, my people are already up my butt about the fact that they're out there doing other cases and I'm not available to back them up.
So maybe we should talk and maybe there's something that can be worked out.
What I would like to say, though, is that I think this is an important story not only in terms of the specific events and the specific crimes, but also in terms of how somebody like this can be created in a society like ours.
You know, I mean, where does this man come from?
And if you can speak to that with a vehicle through Random House, more power to you.
I've got no problem with that.
I have goosebumps right here because you're talking.
This is my work.
You know, I think this is something I would love to do.
And I think the fact that this book that I'm doing would give me the perfect credibility
Well, it would be, I think, an ideal springboard into writing a specific one.
Yeah, and I've got another guy up here that, well, don't talk about it.
I'm a boy with this now, but this is a fascinating story.
Now, one thing I'll make you aware of, there is a possibility here that this thing will not go to trial, and let me tell you why.
The day before yesterday, we filed a motion to suppress the search warrant.
As in most criminal cases involving property, everything springs from the search warrant.
This search warrant was obtained in the most surreptitious manner I have ever seen the FBI use.
There's a long-term paid confidential informant in this story and a whole bunch of other stuff.
Now, we don't have a date set for our suppression hearing, obviously, since it was filed on Wednesday afternoon, but...
If that warrant is suppressed, there's a possibility this matter will never go to trial.
Did you want that?
For myself, I think it would probably in some ways be a relief.
But professionally, it will leave a whole other gamut of issues involving what happens next.
You know, I mean, they got nine tons of Steve shit.
What are they going to do with it?
You think I'm kidding.
I'm not.
Let's say they suppressed a lot.
That means they'd have to return the stuff to Steve, even though it's already... Everything they cannot prove was stolen.
I mean, I understand there are 750 books alone from Harvard that have been identified, 550 from the library of Harvard.
But they were all obtained from, as the product of that search warrant.
Yeah, but then these institutions would probably have to go through the civil courts to recover.
Oh, yeah.
What you'd see is probably at least five years of forfeiture hearings, which in the long run would be a much more difficult task for the feds than to take into trial.
But there's been a lot of play dirty in this one beyond anything I've ever seen.
Let me give you one last anecdote.
My wife just came home, so I got to split here a second.
But when we wanted to go see those books...
over there in Omaha in October.
First they had no problem with it.
And then they said, well, we're going to do that, but we're going to blindfold your client.
Jesus.
And I'm going, wait a minute.
What is this, James Bond?
And we went back and forth with him about that for a few days.
And then he said, oh, we won't blindfold him.
Fine, glad we got that out of the way.
And, of course, their stated reason is that although they say that Steve is not in any way deranged,
Their stated reason was that they were afraid this guy was going to back a semi up to an FBI-bonded warehouse and haul all these books out, right, all 28,000 of them.
But we ended up going over there.
They put us in the back of an FBI vehicle, but they had taped a masking tape on the inside of the windows and blacked out the front of the vehicle by hanging an army blanket between the front and back seats, and they drove us up and down the Omaha freeways for 45 minutes.
Yes, sir.
I asked to go in there, you know, and I said, you can blindfold me.
I said, I've never been to Omaha.
I actually drove through 25 years ago when I was going out to the coast to join my ship, you know, in the Navy, but 20 years ago, whatever it was.
But I just wanted to go in and get the ambiance, because there's got to be an ambiance, there's got to be a feeling in there.
It's going to be an atmospheric thing that you can tap into, you know, I mean, in terms of writing.
And it was, this was no how, no way, you know.
And that's fine.
I got no problems with that.
Well, having been in there, I can tell you this much.
What you're seeing there is something that is so incongruous, because here you have all these old, rare books going back centuries, and they're on stainless steel shelving.
Yeah.
with fluorescent lights over them.
Well, that's bad.
They shouldn't have lights.
Well, that lighting business apparently has been corrected now because they're done actually cataloging.
I think those books are just sitting there in the dark now.
At least I hope they are, because Steve brought that issue up, too, about the lights.
These are his children.
I'm sorry?
He's right?
These books are his children, and he loves them all.
See, I've got another guy here, and when they made him sell his books, and that's the story I'll tell you about.
The story is...
You're forcing me to sell my children and to slave me.
Do you see the parallels here?
Oh, the parallels are tremendous.
Mr. Nicholson and I had lunch on Wednesday before he left to visit his family in Delaware, and we both agreed that it was a fortuitous happenstance that you called.
Really?
Both of us are interested in your project because we're both curious about this thing, but we're also interested in what we perceive as the kind of...
background and supporting information you can give us about this.
Well, let me just go over and make sure I've got the right address here.
Okay, Ray.
Is it Ray?
Is it Raymond or just Ray?
Right, it's Raymond.
Okay, Ray Cornell, and I have trouble there.
I think I have 1507-C-H-A-U-Q-U-A.
Right.
And what is it?
Parkway.
Oh, I would sure appreciate that.
If it would help, just for your own interest, in return, I can, and I've already got permission from Don to do this, I can send you one thing you might find interesting.
A few photographs of the books.
I love it.
All right, I'll take care of it.
Do you have my address?
No, I don't.
So I'd better get it.
Let me get my... All right, go ahead.
I'll give you my PO address and also my home address, but my post office box number is 120 North Grafton, G-R-A-F-T-O-N, M-A, Mass.
And my home address is 92 East Street, which is North Grafton, but either one is... Is that East?
East, that's the name, East.
Okay, the last name is B-A-S-B.
B as in boy, A-S-B, again, A-N-E-S, Basbanes, a Greek name.
Okay.
We get a lot of Greeks out there.
Oh, we do, yeah.
Yeah, I was a Jackson delegate, however.
Were you?
And I got 92 East Street, and that's 120 North Grafton, Mass.
That's 120 PO Box 120.
Okay, that's the PO Box.
So that's two different addresses is what I'm saying.
If you send it to 92 East Street, don't use the PO Box.
What's your zip?
01536.
And I'll find that Max Sander.
You'll really love that Max Sander piece.
I...
I'm trying to remember.
There was some poetry that he had written on the inside of one of those books that I looked at over there, too, that's somewhat similar to the piece that you're using in your opening.
I'll see if I can find that.
You know, I have everything there is now on Steve, all the way back to his baby book.
You don't normally put this much into a case.
Are you fascinated by it?
Oh, yes, I am.
And I'll tell you why I took this case.
When I took this,
I had just come down from a run of 13 straight homicide cases, 10 of which were either crack or cocaine related, and four of which had either perps or victims or both under the age of 15.
And very frankly, the reason I took this case is it has no drugs in it, no guns, no violence, and no dead bodies.
And I think probably in terms of my own mental health, this case was really a godsend because you get sick and burned out after a while.
And it's nice to have a client that you can actually sort of like.
Now, is he bathing?
Oh, my wife is just hell on wheels with him.
He shuttles back and forth between here at one of my employees' houses because, very frankly, the feds have put all these absurd restrictions on him.
Their resistance is coming to Iowa at all.
was his well-known proclivity to flight, quote-unquote, which is totally untrue, and his dangerousness to the community.
Oh, please.
And I got on the witness stand on that one, and I said, well, I just can't understand this.
I've never seen anybody say to another person, your library books are your life, or give me that doorknob or I'll kill you.
You know, at which point he does.
Have you asked him about the doorknobs, though?
Pardon me?
What's the fascination with doorknobs?
They're old.
They're Victorian stuff.
Yeah, but just doorknobs.
Just doorknobs, yeah.
Also, back to that Mormon thing, one of the things that he wanted, and this guy's a magical thinker, by the way.
Are you hip to a magical thinker as opposed to a logical thinker?
Yeah.
Okay.
He attributes aspects of living things to inanimate objects.
Yeah.
He's a very, you know, although the family is not religious, he is very spiritual and very magical.
As a result, one of the things that he wanted very much was a doorknob from the Mormon tabernacle.
You feel like he just stumbled into the twilight zone?
You have...
Okay, you say he's a little guy, right?
Yeah, he's about five, five and a half, a hundred and twenty-five, a hundred and thirty-five.
Last question, does he enjoy any kind of food or is just food just something necessary?
He's a junk food junkie.
How about women?
No women, basically pretty sexualizingly ambivalent.
And again, this goes back to some aspects of his childhood and specifically his mother's mental illness.
He describes himself as bisexual, but he's never actually had a long-running relationship with anybody.
I read women actually as a sexual interest, and I'm just curious if he had any kind of sexual interest.
The books, the books were his life.
The books were his life.
He also, by the way, had a significant collection of Victorian pornography, including those, oh, I forgot one, stereopticon cards.
Excuse me, he had 200,000 stereopticon cards.
We're talking five zeros here, right, after two?
200,000, you betcha.
Tiles of them.
And do we know the provenance of these?
Most of those were, as far as I can determine, and they're almost impossible to trace, were in fact obtained at various antique shops and flea markets all over the nation.
So perhaps obtained legitimately.
Yeah.
But, and again, Victorian scenes, primarily buildings, very, very seldom...
Do you think he's a Victorian man?
A Victorian person?
Nick, he wears Victorian underwear.
Wow.
He does.
I mean, he wears the short-sleeved, strapped-shouldered, flat-bottom union suits that were the standard male underwear for the Victorians.
And we don't know how he got into this.
It just happened.
That I don't know, although I wish the guy could get some new ones, because the ones he's got are pretty damn funky, and when he's dancing around my house, it's kind of a distressing sight.
This is wonderful.
This is really great.
Well, you know, you look at this situation from my perspective and it's sort of like being trapped in the weirdest crime novel ever written.
I mean, every day is something new, something odd, something.
Right now, for example, Stephen is dedicating himself to saving homeless people here in Des Moines.
Sure.
uh and so he goes down he hangs out under the bridges with him he tries to talk him into like going to the shelters and stuff he's as good-hearted as he can be um but he's never never held a job uh the family is by the way significantly wealthy he has absolutely no self-discipline whatsoever he's totally impulse controlled
You know, 9 o'clock to him means any time between 7.30 and 11.
He didn't even own or carry a watch until I absolutely insisted he do so so he could make his check-ins on time.
Time is not relevant to him.
Does he ever talk about the books?
Oh, incessantly.
You know, and he remembers them.
There goes my other line.
We'll talk next week.
All right.
Have a good one.
Thanks, Ray.
Bye-bye.